Modify TiKV in 5 Minutes (#250)
tikv/website: content/docs/5.1/concepts/tikv-in-5-minutes.md

        weight: 1
---

> This tutorial provides you a quick way to get started with TiKV. You are guided to perform the following operations:

Author: ```suggestion
This tutorial provides you a quick way to get started with TiKV. You are guided to perform the following operations: 
```

> This tutorial provides you a quick way to get started with TiKV. You are guided to perform the following operations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial provides you a quick way to get started with TiKV, including the following operations:
```

- [Set up a local TiKV cluster with the default options](#set-up-a-local-tikv-cluster-with-the-default-options)
- [Monitor the TiKV cluster](#monitor-the-cluster)
- [Write data to and read data from the TiKV cluster](#write-data-to-and-read-data-from-the-tikv-cluster)

> - [Stop and deleted a TiKV cluster](#stop-and-delete-the-tikv-cluster)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Stop and delete a TiKV cluster](#stop-and-delete-the-tikv-cluster)
```
Found a small typo when learning from your review~

2. Set the TiUP environment variables:

    1. Redeclare the global environment variables:

        ```bash
        source .bash_profile
        ```

    2. Confirm whether TiUP is installed:

        ```bash
        tiup
        ```

3. If TiUP is already installed, update the TiUP Playground component to the latest version:

    ```bash
    tiup update --self && tiup update playground
    ```

4. Use TiUP Playground to start a local TiKV cluster. Before you do that, check your TiUP version using the following command:

    ```bash
    tiup -v
    ```

>     - If your TiUP version is v1.5.0 or later, execute the following command to start a local TiKV cluster:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - If your TiUP version is v1.5.2 or later, execute the following command to start a local TiKV cluster:
```

        ```bash
        tiup playground --mode tikv-slim
        ```

>     - If your TiUP version is earlier than v1.5.0, execute the following command to start a local TiKV cluster:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - If your TiUP version is earlier than v1.5.2, execute the following command to start a local TiKV cluster:
```

2. Set the TiUP environment variables:

    1. Redeclare the global environment variables:

        ```bash
        source .bash_profile
        ```

    2. Confirm whether TiUP is installed:

        ```bash
        tiup
        ```

>     <!-- Explain the results -->

Author: @marsishandsome Should we explain what the expected result is?

Reviewer 3: Please delete this line.

Author: ```suggestion
```

    ```bash
    tiup -v
    ```

    - If your TiUP version is v1.5.0 or later, execute the following command to start a local TiKV cluster:

        ```bash
        tiup playground --mode tikv-slim
        ```

    - If your TiUP version is earlier than v1.5.0, execute the following command to start a local TiKV cluster:

        ```bash
        tiup playground
        ```

    {{< info >}}
Refer to [TiUP playground document](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/tiup-playground) for more TiUP Playground commands.
    {{< /info >}}

## Monitor the TiKV cluster

After the TiKV cluster is started using TiUP Playground, you might need to monitor the cluster. Perform the following steps to see the needed monitoring metrics:

1. Open your browser, access [http://127.0.0.1:3000](http://127.0.0.1:3000), and login to the Grafana Dashboard. By default, the username is `admin` and the password is `admin`.

2. Open the `TiKV-Summary` page on the Grafana Dashboard and find the monitoring metrics of your TiKV cluster.

## Write data to and read data from the TiKV cluster

> To write to and read from the TiKV cluster, you can use either Java or Python script. In the following two examples, Java and Python are respectively used to write "Hello World!" to TiKV.

Author: @marsishandsome Are Python and Java the only two ways to write and read?

Reviewer 3: There will be another language APIs, e.g. go c++. But it's not ready now.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To write to and read from the TiKV cluster, you can use either Java, Go, Rust, C or Python script. In the following two examples, Java and Python are respectively used to write "Hello World!" to TiKV.
```

        client.put(ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k5"), ByteString.copyFromUtf8("Raw KV"));

        // get
        Optional<ByteString> result = client.get(ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k1"));
        System.out.println(result.get().toStringUtf8());

        // batch get
        List<Kvrpcpb.KvPair> list =client.batchGet(new ArrayList<ByteString>() {{
        add(ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k1"));
        add(ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k3"));
        }});
        System.out.println(list);

        // scan
        list = client.scan(ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k1"), ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k6"), 10);
        System.out.println(list);

        // close
        client.close();
        session.close();
        ```

    2. Run the script above to write "Hello World!" to TiKV:

        ```bash
        jshell --class-path tikv-client-java.jar:slf4j-api.jar --startup test_raw.java

        Hello
        [key: "k1"
        value: "Hello"
        , key: "k3"
        value: "World"
        ]
        [key: "k1"
        value: "Hello"
        , key: "k2"
        value: ","
        , key: "k3"
        value: "World"
        , key: "k4"
        value: "!"
        , key: "k5"
        value: "Raw KV"

>         ]

Author: Is this part the output or what we should write in the command?

Reviewer 3: yes

Author: Is this the output?

OR

Is this what we should write in the command?

Reviewer 3: it's output

Author: It would be better to separate the output and the command.

Reviewer 3: agree

    ```bash
    tiup -v
    ```

    - If your TiUP version is v1.5.2 or later, execute the following command to start a local TiKV cluster:

        ```bash
        tiup playground --mode tikv-slim
        ```

    - If your TiUP version is earlier than v1.5.2, execute the following command to start a local TiKV cluster:

        ```bash
        tiup playground
        ```

    {{< info >}}
Refer to [TiUP playground document](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/tiup-playground) for more TiUP Playground commands.
    {{< /info >}}

## Monitor the TiKV cluster

After the TiKV cluster is started using TiUP Playground, you might need to monitor the cluster. Perform the following steps to see the needed monitoring metrics:

1. Open your browser, access [http://127.0.0.1:3000](http://127.0.0.1:3000), and login to the Grafana Dashboard. By default, the username is `admin` and the password is `admin`.

2. Open the `TiKV-Summary` page on the Grafana Dashboard and find the monitoring metrics of your TiKV cluster.

## Write data to and read data from the TiKV cluster

> To write to and read from the TiKV cluster, you can use Java, Go, Rust, C or Python script. In the following two examples, Java and Python are respectively used to write "Hello World!" to TiKV.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To write to and read from the TiKV cluster, you can use Java, Go, Rust, C, or Python script. 

The following two examples use Java and Python respectively to show how to write "Hello World!" to TiKV.
```

        TiSession session = TiSession.create(conf);
        RawKVClient client = session.createRawClient();

        // put
        client.put(ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k1"), ByteString.copyFromUtf8("Hello"));
        client.put(ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k2"), ByteString.copyFromUtf8(","));
        client.put(ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k3"), ByteString.copyFromUtf8("World"));
        client.put(ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k4"), ByteString.copyFromUtf8("!"));
        client.put(ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k5"), ByteString.copyFromUtf8("Raw KV"));

        // get
        Optional<ByteString> result = client.get(ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k1"));
        System.out.println(result.get().toStringUtf8());

        // batch get
        List<Kvrpcpb.KvPair> list =client.batchGet(new ArrayList<ByteString>() {{
        add(ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k1"));
        add(ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k3"));
        }});
        System.out.println(list);

        // scan
        list = client.scan(ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k1"), ByteString.copyFromUtf8("k6"), 10);
        System.out.println(list);

        // close
        client.close();
        session.close();
        ```

>     2. Run the script above to write "Hello World!" to TiKV:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    2. Run the script in the `test_raw.java` file to write "Hello World!" to TiKV:
```

        ```bash
        jshell --class-path tikv-client-java.jar:slf4j-api.jar --startup test_raw.java
        ```

>         The following result is output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        The output is as follows:
```

This package requires Python 3.5+.
    {{< /info >}}

2. Use either the `RAW KV` API or `TXN KV` API to write data to TiKV.

    - Try the `RAW KV` API.

        1. Save the following Python script to the `test_raw.py` file.

            ```python
            from tikv_client import RawClient

            client = RawClient.connect("127.0.0.1:2379")

            # put
            client.put(b"k1", b"Hello")
            client.put(b"k2", b",")
            client.put(b"k3", b"World")
            client.put(b"k4", b"!")
            client.put(b"k5", b"Raw KV")

            # get
            print(client.get(b"k1"))

            # batch get
            print(client.batch_get([b"k1", b"k3"]))

            # scan
            print(client.scan(b"k1", end=b"k5", limit=10, include_start=True, include_end=True))
            ```

>         2. Run the test script above to write "Hello World!" to TiKV:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        2. Run the `test_raw.py` script to write "Hello World!" to TiKV:
```

            ```bash
            python3 test_raw.py
            ```

>             The following result is output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            The output is as follows:
```

            ```bash
            b'Hello'
            [(b'k3', b'World'), (b'k1', b'Hello')]
            [(b'k1', b'Hello'), (b'k2', b','), (b'k3', b'World'), (b'k4', b'!'), (b'k5', b'Raw KV')]
            ```

    - Try the `TXN KV` API.

        1. Save the following Python script to the `test_txn.py` file.

            ```python
            from tikv_client import TransactionClient

            client = TransactionClient.connect("127.0.0.1:2379")

            # put
            txn = client.begin()
            txn.put(b"k1", b"Hello")
            txn.put(b"k2", b",")
            txn.put(b"k3", b"World")
            txn.put(b"k4", b"!")
            txn.put(b"k5", b"TXN KV")
            txn.commit()

            snapshot = client.snapshot(client.current_timestamp())

            # get
            print(snapshot.get(b"k1"))

            # batch get
            print(snapshot.batch_get([b"k1", b"k3"]))

            # scan
            print(snapshot.scan(b"k1", end=b"k5", limit=10, include_start=True, include_end=True))
            ```

>         2. Run the test script to write "Hello World!" to TiKV:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        2. Run the `test_txn.py` script to write "Hello World!" to TiKV:
```

            ```bash
            python3 test_txn.py
            ```

>             The following result is output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            The output is as follows:
```

            ```bash
            b'Hello'
            [(b'k3', b'World'), (b'k1', b'Hello')]
            [(b'k1', b'Hello'), (b'k2', b','), (b'k3', b'World'), (b'k4', b'!'), (b'k5', b'TXN KV')]
            ```

## Stop and delete the TiKV cluster

> 1. To stop the TiKV cluster, back to the terminal session in which you have started the TiKV cluster. Press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd> and wait for the cluster to stop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do not need the local TiKV cluster anymore, you can stop and delete it.

1. To stop the TiKV cluster, get back to the terminal session in which you have started the TiKV cluster. Press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd> and wait for the cluster to stop.
```
